My thumb chafed as I flipped through the pages before me, my mind instead focused on the palette of colours hidden under my study table. A tingle rushed through the tips of my fingers, itching to caress my brush and slide it across my canvas to produce a tide of orange and lilac. But I dared not do it. Since I was a child, I was pushed into the banal world of facts and statistics that I didn't understand.
 
The numbers in front of me spiralled hypnotically. I felt a yawn escape. Above my bed, a striking woman emerged from the acrylic backdrop of a Hindu temple. The temple was pleasingly detailed with intricate carvings of deities: Brahma. Vishnu. Shiva. Her fingertips were painted a vermillion and she was adorned with an array of golden embellishments, the finery matching the embroidery of her mauve saree. I was entranced by the infusion of ocean blues and vivid greens that animated the peacocks bordering the scene. 
 
The door creaked open. My mother's grim face peered through. Her skin glistened with a sheen of sweat and her shoulders were hunched. She had just returned from work. As she met my eyes, her lips curved into a smile.
 
“Studying hard I hope.” 
 
My gaze fell to the floor. 
 
Her hands, calloused from the tedious labour of customer service, held my face as she kissed me on the forehead. “I can’t wait until the day you’ll have a law degree in your hand. You’ll never have to slave away at a job you don’t love.” Her Hindi accent heavy as she pronounced the foreign syllable of ‘law’. 
I caught the gleam of her wet eyes as she left to change out of her work clothes. 
 
Her words prickled my heart. I seized the frame from the wall and hurled it. It shuddered as it broke against the wooden door. 
 
***
 
The oppressive heat of Varanasi yielded sweat that trickled down my face. My clammy hands tightly grasped a leather binder. In my 26 years of living, I had never stepped foot on the soil of my ancestors until now. India. The soil that nurtured my mother and farewelled her as she left to raise a child in a foreign land.
 
The footpath to the temple was crowded with aggressive shopkeepers and fringed with restless cars honking their way along the busy street. In the tumult of the hour, countless faces rushed by me speaking a vague but familiar language. The air was intoxicated with a delicious aroma of fried onions, tomato and garlic, a snack which tourists relished in as the vendors chirped in satisfaction. 
 
My destination was on the right. 
 
A magnificent temple chiselled in soapstone that was intricately carved to depict ancient Hindu rituals. Stepping into the sanctuary was like entering a new realm. My heart ached with the realisation that I was here to demolish this sacred shrine.
 
A gentle hand grazed my shoulder. 
 
‘Are you perhaps the lawyer representing the case for the developers who wish to raze this temple?’ A short, ample woman wrapped in an olive saree stood in front of me, suspiciously eyeing my plain grey pantsuit. I nodded. Her frown deepened. 
 
‘I’m the caretaker. It is a travesty that your client wants to erase 1000 years of spiritual history for the development of a western emporium….’ Her words faded as the sculptures of Hindu deities, Lakshmi. Parvati. Saraswati, that lined the walls seemed to judge me. Time had oxidised the metal, darkening the surface of the fresco. It resembled a forgotten painting, the image that had been crystalised in my youthful memory, awakened.
 
A painting that had seemed perfect failed in the presence of the mesmerising inscriptions of Sanskrit and the meticulously engraved feathers of peacocks bordering the deities.
 
The impulse to capture this sublimity on my canvas seized me. It pierced my heart, unlocking desires that had been long locked away.
 
‘Painter? What sort of a profession is that? My friend’s daughter is becoming a lawyer, fighting for justice, and you want to waste your talents with colouring books! “Arey, log kya kahenge!” (What will people say?)’ She melodramatically face-palmed her forehead.
 
I mentally kicked myself for bringing this up. ‘Maa. Does it matter what people will say more than my happiness?’
 
She sighed. ‘It’s not that easy. You don’t understand how much I have struggled to provide food on the table. I don’t wish the same for you! What sort of income does a painter bring home? Do you even know?’
 
The memory resurfaced, bringing with it a pounding heartache and buried emotions which burst upon me like a fury. 
 
All those days spent in heated courtrooms, wishing I was in my childhood bedroom silently capturing the world’s majestic landscapes. All those calls to my mother spent cheerfully detailing what an absolute joy law school was! Never negotiating with the wistful desire eating away at me. 
 
I sighed, aching to sit. I just wanted to paint. But how could I against my mother’s wishes.
 
Her words penetrated again “So, you don't have to slave away at a job you don't love.” 
 
But that is what I was doing.
 
“It’s not that easy.” My mother’s voice continued to agitate. 

‘I know. But this was what I wanted. I wanted to be happy. Happy.’
 
I glanced back at the peacocks. They held my stare, expectant, untying knots that had bound my heart all these years. I had no choice; I realised what I had to do. 
 
‘I’ll go get you some water.’ The woman’s words snapped me out of my trance as she left to fulfil habitual Indian courtesy.
 
A cushioned area, where devotees sat to observe venerations, seemed like an inviting place. Sitting down, I pulled out a pen and a notepad and carefully traced the eye of the peacock gazing at me.

